Hello.
Thanks for coming to this talk.
My name is Babis Hallos.
I am a software engineer with Amazon Web Services.
I'm currently working with a team that maintains the Firecracker Virtual Machine Monitor.
Today I will be speaking to you about Virtual Machine Snapshots.
Essentially I'm going to be speaking more about some challenges we face when we clone
virtual machines and then we start multiple virtual machines from that same clone.
A problem that we call Snapshot Safety.
I'm going to be speaking a bit about the mechanisms we have today for tackling those
issues.
What do we believe we need to do as a community in order to grow awareness about the issue
and build systems that are safe in the presence of Snapshots.
Quick sneak peek on the agenda.
We're going to define what is a virtual machine Snapshot for us and what is problematic with
virtual machine Snapshots and which scenarios we have problems with them.
Then go through a bit about the mechanisms we have today for addressing those issues
and how we are thinking about building solutions that are system wide and address the problem.
Finally I'm going to be speaking a bit about what we're planning to do next on the area.
Earlier this morning there was a very nice talk about virtual machine Snapshots.
It went much more in detail what I'm going to go into but let's think for the moment
about the virtual machine as a collection of some state and that state might be memory,
the guest memory, architectural state of the VM.
Then you might have some devices for doing networking and storage, etc.
Then some host resources like whatever state the KVM in Linux is holding for us for the
VM, maybe a top device for the networking and files that back our storage.
For this talk, Snapshot is simply the serialization of this state at a given point in time in
a file that we store somewhere in some storage medium.
Then we use that Snapshot file in order to start one or more VMs, not that exact identical
copies of the initial virtual machine.
The morning talk spoke about various scenarios why you might want to do that.
For example, you want to give a backup of your machine so you can go back in time in
a previous state, etc.
Or another scenario that you might want to do that is if you are building some sort of
service that uses VMs to isolate workloads and you want to spawn these VMs very, very
fastly in a state that they are ready to handle user requests, you might want to spawn a VM
like that, bring it in a state, initialize everything, every service, a component that
you want in order to get it ready to handle requests and take a Snapshot at that point.
Whenever you have a new request in the future, instead of booting a machine from scratch,
booting all the operating system, the user space, blah, blah, blah, blah, you just resume
from a Snapshot and then you are much faster in a state where you can handle that request.
What's wrong with that?
Now, let's look again at the previous picture of our VM and let's imagine for a second that
somewhere in VM memory or it doesn't have to be memory, it can be any other component
of the VM.
There is some piece of state, an object, some sort of state that for the purpose of the
application that it's making use of it, it needs to be unique and or secret.
It needs to have this property in order for the application to operate correctly or securely,
etc.
Now, you see where I'm going with this, once we take that Snapshot, that property of this
state is lost.
Here we're speaking about what sort of mechanisms, what sort of applications are having this
problem and how we can address this exact problem.
We are aware even today of many classes of applications that rely on this assumption
of some part of the state being unique, secret, etc.
For example, we can think of cryptographically secured pseudo-random number generators.
Those are random number generators that have the property that it is very, very hard, if
not impossible, to guess what the next byte they're going to give you is.
Many applications, the security of many applications rely on this property.
They have other properties as well that given knowledge of the current state of the PRNG,
you cannot guess the previous bytes, etc.
But for those sort of applications, imagine that one, those sort of random number generators,
imagine that once you take the Snapshot, the VM Snapshot and you start more VMs from
that, the state of the PRNG is being duplicated.
So unless we do something else, unless we add more entropy, for example, in this PRNG,
in all of the VMs that start from the same Snapshot, the next byte that is going to be
given out from that PRNG is going to be exactly same in all of the VMs.
Other examples of use cases that have this problem is network configuration.
Imagine you have a VM that has some network configuration, IP addresses, MAC addresses,
etc.
Suddenly you Snapshot that VM and you create new VMs from that Snapshot that live in the
same network as your seed VM.
Suddenly they appear in the network VMs with the exact same network configuration and depending
on your use case that might be a problem.
So you might want to be able to do something about it once this happened.
You might want to detect that this is happening and do something about it.
Another class of applications that are affected by this is anything that really uses a UUID,
a GUID.
Many applications rely on the uniqueness of this variable, this number, in order to perform
correctly.
Imagine for example once you take this Snapshot of an application that has a UUID and you
start more VMs out of it and the application that is running in this VM is using that
number as an index in a database to modify stuff, read stuff, suddenly you have a race
condition on the database.
More than one entities are going to be using that same thing for accessing data.
Any sort of use case where you rely on this thing being unique is a problem here.
And really we do not know exactly all of the applications that use cases that have this
problem.
So it really depends on the application itself.
We really need to go see whether our applications keep state that has the semantics, the semantics
of uniqueness and secrecy.
And if you know that you are running some workload that has this problem and you run
in such environment, let's speak about and think of what sort of mechanisms you could
use in order to make this use case safe.
Okay, now that we know a bit more about the problem that we are speaking about, we are
facing, let's see what kind of mechanisms do we have today to address it.
Essentially the most fundamental mechanism we have today for doing that is called virtual
machine generation ID.
It operates as a notification mechanism for the VM after it is getting resumed from a
snapshot about that particular fact.
But it tells the VM, okay, now you are in a new world.
You are not in the world that you thought you were without having rebooted.
And in the technical aspect of it, it's an ACPI virtual device.
It is emulated by the monitor.
And the way it provides the notification inside the guest is via a generation ID, which is
a 16 bytes cryptographically random number that changes every time we resume from a snapshot.
So when you resume from the snapshot, the monitor makes sure that it changes the new
value, it stores a new value in the generation ID, and before resuming the VCPUs of the VM,
it injects an ACPI notification in the system.
And once it resumes from the snapshot, resumes the VCPUs, then the guest kernel is going
to handle that ACPI notification.
What happens in Linux is that today the kernel is using the new generation ID as extra entropy
for its entropy pool.
So it's receding its entropy pool, essentially, so that it avoids the problem we were speaking
about before about PRNGs.
It works, apparently.
It works fine.
There is still a bit of a concern regarding the fact of its asynchronousity in the sense
that there is a small race window between the moment we resume the VCPUs and the ACPI
notification is being handled by whatever thread in the kernel handles it.
Okay.
Yay.
Sorry about that.
But at least we have something.
Nice.
So moving forward, recently we built in the Linux kernel, contributed a small essentially
change that every time the generation ID changes, we emit a new event to the user space, because
before that VM generation ID implementation did not do anything.
It was using, since it was using the generation ID as entropy for the kernel PRNG, people
were nervous about exporting it to the user space.
So I said, okay, that's it.
And in reality, the user space does not really need that 16 bytes themselves.
It just needs a small notification.
So there you have it.
It got matched recently in 6.8 and it is still an asynchronous notification mechanism.
So everything that in the user space that runs event loops, for example, can monitor
for it and get notified about the fact that they're now in a new VM started from a snapshot.
It is still racy, this thing has to be said.
So if we think that we have use cases that need to get more asynchronous mechanism, more
synchronous mechanism, we should continue doing work to build those.
Okay, so going back to the PRNGs, mainly because they are used by security sensitive applications,
let's see how these mechanisms can help us.
In runtime systems that maintain their own PRNGs like JVM, we can now use the VM GenADU
event to be notified about snapshots.
So upon resume, the runtime would get that event, eventually would be notified and it
would receive the PRNG as soon as possible.
Now in other PRNGs that are implemented from libraries, within libraries, this is a bit
more weird situation at the moment because an asynchronous mechanism like a U-event is
not a perfect fit for the programming model.
We will need to do something else about them.
One idea here would be to use prediction resistance with what cryptographers call prediction resistance
with hardware instructions.
The idea here is simple.
With every byte that the PRNG returns to you, you mix in some random bits that you got from
a hardware instruction that is not affected obviously by virtual machine snapshots, so
the problem just goes away.
If you are able to do that, it doesn't matter if you have resumed from a snapshot.
The state of the PRNG is always going to, including these snapshot irrelevant random
bytes and everything is going to be fine.
Other potential solutions, for example, in cases where you do not have these instructions
or for whatever reason you don't want to use them, it would be to build some sort of synchronous
APIs on top of the asynchronous VM-genade event, for example.
But we really think that we should do something, don't go out on me again.
We really think we should do something about the use case of these libraries.
Okay, so let's think, now that we know what mechanism we have available, let's see if
we can really solve the problem.
And let's follow this example.
It's a very simple example of a VM that has started from a snapshot.
The hypervisor and the guest kernel support VM-genade.
The kernel is going to use the generation ID to receive its random number generator.
And we have a user space application that does some network communication and it wants
to use TLS.
And it reads some random bits from the from the view random, which is safe because of
VM-genade in order to do some sort of communication.
And everything works fine.
The application creates the session key to start communicating without the world and
everything looks fine.
And at that point, we take a snapshot.
Now the moment we resume the VM, the second VM from that snapshot, the session key is
duplicated in essentially both VMs.
So even though we have these mechanisms built in the system that give safe interfaces over
the view random, for example, the final system is not necessarily safe.
The same would go, for example, for GUID applications that have GUIDs, et cetera, et cetera, and
they would need to adapt themselves.
And it is true that the application could use the VM-genade event, but that event is
present in the resumed snapshot, in the resumed VM.
In the initial VM, there is not today a mechanism to do something about that.
And again, there is some sort of race window between the event resuming the VM and the
application being reacting to that event, which makes us think that probably there are
things that should not ever be serialized at all.
It would be much easier if that session key was never serialized.
And that makes us think that VM-genade is a post-mortem mechanism.
It is a notification in the new VMs, not the initial VM.
And by the moment it arrives to us, sensitive information operations might be already in
flight, and even if we handle that notification, there is nothing we can do about the things
that are in flight.
And that makes us think as well next that what we should probably do is control the timing
of snapshot events.
The moment snapshot events in the lifetime of the VM can arrive, let's say, at arbitrary
points in time, instead we should control them.
We should do something before we take even the snapshot and make sure that we only take
a snapshot when the machine is in a safe state to be snapshotted.
And once we resume, make sure that every application that needs to has adapted to the new situation
before marking the system as ready to be operational again.
Thinking about these things, some time ago we were speaking with system defaults and
we thought about modeling this problem using force states, describing our systems being
in one of force states.
Planning is the normal state of your VM.
Now once you want to take a snapshot, you start quiescing.
People earlier today spoke about this as freezing, for example.
And during that period you do things preparing yourself to be snapshotted so you cannot find
yourself in a previous situation.
And once you are quiesced, once everybody is ready to be snapshot, then you can take
the snapshot and then the same.
And on the resume path, on the resume from the snapshot path, you essentially do the
opposite work, right?
You start from a quiesced state, then you start inquiescing, getting ready for the new world,
recreating your GUIDs and what not.
And once everything is done, then you can be running again, up and running again.
SystemD has this nice concept of inhibitors, which can essentially applications use in
order to say, OK, don't do that.
Don't do that transition until you are ready to, I tell you I'm ready to do so.
For example, there are inhibitors for system CTL suspend.
At the moment we were thinking that maybe we could use some para virtual agent to orchestrate
everything.
In reality, maybe system CTL suspend is all what we need and we can drive this from the
hypervisor by sending an ACPI event.
And going back to the previous example, how that would look like is we are in a running
state in LVM, we have our previous application, and suddenly the control plane informs the
PV agent that it needs to start quiescing.
Here I say system CTL quiesce, but again, unless we find the reason why suspend should
be different than some new sort of operation, we could even use suspend and get away with
having to have a para virtual agent in there.
In any case, once that happens, the application would say, OK, do not get quiesced again because
I need to do some cleanup before you can snapshot me.
And once the application does that, it says, OK, now I'm good to go.
And at that point the control plane knows that, OK, we can take that snapshot.
Now on the opposite path, the control plane would probably resume the VM from a snapshot
and then start the unquiescing operation.
The application might want to say, OK, wait until I know that I'm safe again because I
want to create new random numbers.
And I do that.
And at that time, we are safe module of that tiny race condition in order to start getting
random numbers again and recreate our safe and be in the state we want to be in order
to be up and running.
That's it.
So yeah, we started working in adding support in Firecracker for VM GenAD.
Up until now, we were telling people who were using the snapshot in feature in such a way
that they should make sure that manually they would need to receive their kernels, PRNGs,
and they use the space PRNGs after the fact.
The other thing we want to pay attention to is working with PRNG owners in order to find
proper ways to make their libraries not safe.
Here we're speaking about the PRNGs that are implemented as libraries such as OpenSSL, AWS,
and C, et cetera, et cetera.
And start building this system we spoke about in system D, start modeling this in system
D.
And earlier, we had some ground work already done some time ago.
And we hope that system D is going to be just the first one that we get this into and hopefully
other management systems will follow.
And that's it.
Without that, I'd be happy to take questions.
I just wanted to ask, you mentioned the network issues where machine comes up with the same
back address.
Didn't appear to address that.
Is there a plan to take care of that situation as well?
Or is that a problem?
Yeah.
The question was that we mentioned that during the presentation that there are problems with
networking when you take snapshots and resume and whether we plan to address those at the
future.
Yeah.
I think that this is part as well of the system D work that we're going to do.
This problem essentially appears mainly when systems are in networks.
If your VMs are not networked, there is no problem if two VMs that are not in the network
are communicating somehow, they have the same random numbers.
So yes, for example, something that we would like to do is to, I guess, shut down networking
before taking a snapshot so you're sure that there are not in-flight connections and stuff
like that.
So I think this is going to be part of that work.
Thank you.
If we have to come up with a MAC address, we generally try to hash things first outside
kind of even if we can also hash that into that element,
it's already here.
We have been discussing this, like, this is going to happen
in my conference.
We have to identify the generation ideas
to the most obvious thing in the world,
to add that to the hash.
So that basically, yeah, once the generative changes
and everything, get this into the GHD,
it's not going to go to wherever else.
Thank you very much.